The Buddhist teachings always have a slightly different take on things, than most of the rest of the world,
and so it is also with sensuality and sensual pleasures. 

First of all, what do we mean by sensual pleasures in Buddhism? 

What we mean is of course the idea of desire for everything concerned with the five senses, anything you see, anything you hear, anything you taste, anything you touch,
even anything you smell in this world. That is the the sensual world, that is sensuality.

So you can start to see pretty much straight away, if that is the world of sensuality, that's pretty much all there is almost. Our world is bombarded by the five senses throughout the day, week after week, year after year,
usually for the whole lifetime. 

Only occasionally you escape that world a little bit, maybe through meditation practice or whatever.

The first way in which the Buddhism is different from
the rest of the world in thinking about sensuality is that Buddhism doesn't really have a puritanical kind of strain to it. 

Buddhism doesn't say that sensuality is bad just because it's bad, Buddhism doesn't say that enjoying ourselves in the world, having relationships, entertainment,
eating nice food, all that stuff is not "bad" from a Buddhist point of view. 

So Buddhism lacks some of this puritanical strain that you can sometimes find elsewhere
in our society. That is already quite a liberating thing, yeah? 

There's an interesting passage in the Pali canon where the Buddha says to the monks who might not be practicing properly:
"You are missing out! You are missing out the happiness of the monastic life!" 

You are not getting the happiness of the monastic life, and you are also missing out on the happiness of lay life.

The happiness of the monastic life, what is that? That is
being peaceful inside, getting some of the joy and happiness that comes from meditation practice. 

The point is that humang beings desire happiness or pleasures
in one way or another. Life without pleasure is a meaningless life. So Buddhism is not anti-pleasure, or anti-happiness or
anti-enjoyment.

This is the one side of the coin, but the other side of the coin is that the Buddha also said that there can be
certain dangers with sensual pleasures. 

One of the main points of the Buddhist teachings is to live well, to live with kindness and compassion. The moment that those sensual pleasures take us beyond the boundary of morality, when we start misbehaving, maybe stealing or committing adultery or whatever else it is,
once we get down that avenue, that is when we have taken sensual indulgence too far.

So we enjoy the sensual pleasures within the bounds of morality, yeah? This is kind of the Buddhist attitude. So we don't hurt other people, we don't hurt other beings,
and when we don't do that, then it is an acceptable way of enjoying the world around us.

But then the other reason why sensuality is problematic,
now we are getting to the kind of deeper reasons, is because sensuality is, to some extent,
opposed to the meditation practice. 

It's like a trade-off in a sense. The more you let go of the sensual world, the more profound your meditation becomes,
the more you're attached to the sensual work, the more kind of shallow your meditation is. 

Very often, you hear people saying that, "I want to enjoy the world and I also want to enjoy meditation." But the point is that you cannot enjoy both fully, there's always a trade-off between the two. 

This is the thing that I think a lot of people in the Buddhist world, especially in the West, because people are still kind of fairly new to Buddhism, don't really grasp what these concepts are. So to understand that, you actually have to read some of the discourse of the Buddha,
to see that this actually is the case. 

And when you think about it, it is actually very obvious.
If you indulge in sensual pleasures you attach to the sensuality. Attachment is always just behind indulgence and enjoyment. You want to be there, you want to be able to see it, because "wow, so many beautiful sites". Or you want to enjoy your relationships, or your food, or whatever it is. You want to be able to hear because the music you listen to is so beautiful.

And maybe it is, I'm not saying it isn't, but you attach to that. Because we indulge in it, we attach to it, and when you attach to it, when you try to meditate, you can't let go.
Letting go is precisely the exact opposite of indulgence. 

The more inwards you want to go, the more you have to let go of the five senses and the sensual world. Once you understand that, you start to understand why there is such a thing as monastic life.

It's not because we are world-denying, boring kind of people sitting in the forest,
crying by ourselves, we are not kind of masochists or anything like that.

Monastic life is trying to enhance that process of letting go of external things,
while moving more inwards. These things are far harder to do in lay life. 

In a deeper sense the sensuality is the bond that ties us to saṃsāra. That is why it is really problematic. 

Saṃsāra is this Pali word which means like the round of existence. You carry on, you born here, you die there,
rebirth and re-death. 

Re-death is a really good word because you don't die only once, you die many times. If you get reborn, you get have to re-die as well.That's part of the problem here. 

The bondage to saṃsāric existence, that is the real problem, and the most powerful, the strongest of all those bonds is the bond of sensuality. Sensuality is always about future, it's about craving, it's about moving somewhere else,
always moving towards something, never really being satisfied in the present moment.

That moving towards something is like a projection of yourself into the future, that is why it ties you for a long time into the future again and again and again.


So these are some of the reasons, you can see here again the balance of Buddhism. The balance of seeing the problem with something, seeing the gratification and the problem, and then finding a kind of middle way.

So many things in the Buddhist teachings are about a middle way, and so it is also with sensuality.

So it's a natural path, whereby your meditation deepens, you naturally let go of things that actually are less important to you.

Sensuality becomes less important, meditation becomes more important, you don't force it, you don't push it aside, it happens quite naturally. This is a beautiful part, the beautiful path that you see right there.